# Coriolis Forces

<p>The first notice of the Coriolis force in Western cutlure is that cannon balls fired to the North would always drift to the East, discovered by Giovanni Battista Riccioli and his assistant Francesco Maria Grimaldi published in 1651 <[Source](https://physicstoday.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/PT.3.1195)>. Cannon balls would have been especially susceptable to the Coriolis force because of their fast launch speed (large v), and them being fired over long distances (longer time for the force to cause a deflection).</p>
<p>I couldn't find anything directly stating that Indigenous peoples observed the Coriolis force, though I recognize a record could exist either buried online or in a physical location offline, I figured that if there was a long-range weapon similar to the cannon ball that was used by an Indigenous group, then it is at least plausible that the Coriolis force was observed in this way. Note that some Indigenous peoples monitored the weather and did forecasting, so it was likely that the Coriolis effect was found this way due to the direction of the wind dependent on latitude.</p>
<p> For bows and arrows, it is unlikely to notice the Coriolis effect since the mass is small (easily deflected by wind), and they are not shot over long distances. Even with modern computerized bows which calculate the trajectory deviation from the wind, the Coriolis force is negligable compared to other, much more prevalent forces like the local wind and the "arrow"-dynamics of the arrow. [Atlatl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spear-thrower) are the same idea as the bow and arrow, but use a rod with a "cup" at the end to get more leverage and accuracy. They would shoot spears, or darts, and would be able to shoot it faster than with a bow. I'm not sure on the ranges of this, but I found someone was able to launch it 250 m as their longest throw. Because of how significant other forces on the projectile will be, I think it is possible, but unlikely that the Coriolis effect would have been discovered in this way. It is much more likely that the Indigenous groups found the Coriolis force through weather measurements.</p>



